A unanimous Florida Supreme Court refused today to compel Miami-Dade County to resume its manual recount of nearly 700,000 paper ballots. The ruling was a serious setback to Vice President Al Gore, whose aides promptly announced that on Monday he would formally contest the certified results of the Florida election.
With Mr. Gore struggling to overtake Gov. George W. Bush of Texas in the Florida presidential vote count, today's one-paragraph ruling effectively cut him off from a potentially rich source of Democratic votes in South Florida. That painful political fact forced him to prepare to take a step he has thus far resisted for fear that the American public, restless for a result 16 days after the presidential election, would begin to view him as ungracious.
The State Supreme Court's rebuff  came after a state appeals court denied the same motion late Wednesday night.
The pair of rulings left at least some of Mr. Gore's supporters wondering whether he could ever prevail and how much longer he should try. His prospects now rest more than ever with the trickle of votes in Broward and Palm Beach Counties.
Before the Miami-Dade recount was abruptly halted on Wednesday, Mr. Gore had a net gain of 157 votes there, and based on those results his lawyers have projected that a complete hand recount would deliver Mr. Gore roughly 800 of the 930 votes by which he trails Mr. Bush in Florida's official results. Recounts in Broward and Palm Beach Counties through today have given him a net increase of 227 votes.
By contesting the results in Miami-Dade, Mr. Gore hopes at least to recover the 157 votes, and, more ambitiously, to gain many more through a complete recount that could be conducted under the supervision of a state judge who would preside over his contest action. Thus far, aides said, Mr. Gore has plans to contest  only the Miami-Dade results, but, they added, he may ultimately contest the results in other counties, too.
''I think the American people want to see a full, fair and accurate count of the vote, and they want to see the election certified for the candidate who got the most votes,'' said Doug Hattaway, a spokesman for Mr. Gore.
But David Boies, a leading lawyer for Mr. Gore, acknowledged the public relations troubles implicit in challenging certified election results through a contest action, a seldom-used provision of elections law. By filing a formal contest, the Gore campaign will ask a state court judge in Tallahassee to invalidate the results of canvassing officials and supervise a recount of the ballots cast in Miami-Dade County. It will, as Mr. Boies said, ''take some explaining.''
Aides to Mr. Bush, who had castigated the Florida Supreme Court as an instrument of the Democratic Party after it unanimously approved manual recounts on Tuesday, declined to comment on today's court ruling.
''It's Thanksgiving,'' said Mindy Tucker, a spokeswoman for the Bush campaign.
Still, today's developments raised a whole series of complicated legal and political questions about a field of battle that now has many fronts, from Florida's capital to the nation's capital, from state courtrooms facing various lawsuits to the United States Supreme Court, where Mr. Bush filed an appeal to stop all hand recounts in Florida.
Today, Mr. Gore's lawyers filed their response with the court. They called Mr. Bush's request a ''bald attempt'' to interfere in the Florida balloting.
Chief among the new questions is the length of time it will take for the courts to resolve any contest actions, and whether this new round of litigation will provoke the Republican-dominated Florida Legislature to intervene. Many Republican legislators here have suggested this week that if legal gridlock makes it impossible to resolve the Florida election, they will convene a special session to appoint Florida's 25 electors.
But Mr. Gore's aides, while expressing regret and disappointment for any delay caused by the contest action, sought to present it as an entirely legitimate course that even Republican lawyers had referred to approvingly during arguments to the Florida Supreme Court. Mr. Gore's aides also noted that the Florida Supreme Court itself suggested on Tuesday that contest actions were an appropriate remedy. The court expressly set a deadline for recount results that would allow each side time to contest the results before Dec. 12, when federal law requires each state to name its electors to the Electoral College.
Mr. Gore's lawyers said a contest action could be resolved before the 12th. But it seems likely, given the political fury on both sides, that his lawsuit will set off a whole new series of appeals.
''The court has indicated that the right stage to take it into account is at the contest stage,'' Mr. Boies said, referring to the Gore campaign's growing list of complaints about the county canvassing boards in Broward, Palm Beach and Miami-Dade Counties.
Indeed, the immediate impact of today's Supreme Court decision shifted attention to these three counties, which must report final results to the Florida secretary of state by 5 p.m. Sunday, or by 9 a.m. Monday should the secretary of state's office be closed on Sunday.
Mr. Gore's lawyers said they would continue to press the Miami-Dade canvassing board to resume counting, or to at least report the results of the aborted hand recount on Sunday. But with Miami-Dade County giving no indication of a reversal, the Democrats' hopes turned toward Palm Beach County, where officials counting the votes by hand took the day off today for the holiday but plan to resume on Friday, and to Broward County, where the hand recount continued today and Mr. Gore gained a modest number of votes.
Putting their faith in several thousands of ''dimpled'' ballots that have yet to be counted in either county, Mr. Gore's aides said today that they remained confident that he would emerge victorious by the Sunday deadline. Ronald A. Klain, a senior Gore advisor, said, ''If we get a full, fair and accurate count in Broward and Palm, those two counties will be enough to put us over the top.''
But Mr. Gore has struggled to make serious headway. In Palm Beach County, Mr. Gore had gained just two votes.
Mr. Gore did better in Broward County today, where he picked up 88 votes. The new votes bring Mr. Gore's net gain from the Broward hand count to 225.
Tempers boiled over at times, as Republicans voiced repeated objections as the laborious process of scrutinizing each ballot card continued, and one observer was nearly thrown out of the courtroom. Judge Robert W. Lee, the chairman of the canvassing board, threatened to eject William Scherer, a Republican lawyer who had been especially vocal in his disapproval.
The exchanges underscored how not even the Thanksgiving holiday, typically a sort of national timeout, could defuse the intensity of this election struggle. Any hopes of a respite evaporated shortly after 10 a.m. today, when Mr. Gore's lawyers filed a  motion asserting that the Miami-Dade canvassing board had perhaps been influenced by ''protests, political attacks and near mob-like action'' when it abruptly decided on Wednesday to halt the recount.
''Scores of noisy demonstrators engulfed the counting floors,'' the Gore petition said, describing the chaotic scene on Wednesday inside the Miami-Dade elections offices. ''Many were yelling and some pounding on the doors and windows in close proximity to the election department's staff. Democratic personnel were physically assaulted within yards of the vote counting, while in the lobby below prominent Republicans launched vituperative attacks on the canvassing board members and its staff.''
The justices, scattered to their respective Thanksgiving dinners, were hastily tracked down by court personnel, who faxed them copies of the motion. The justices then conferred by telephone before reaching a decision. One indication of the certainty behind their ruling was the fact that they made it without seeking a response from Republicans.
As the legal wrangling continued in Florida, the Republican vice-presidential nominee, Dick Cheney, was recovering from a mild heart attack he had on Wednesday morning at his home in McLean, Va. He remained in good condition at the George Washington University Hospital. Several members of Mr. Cheney's family, including his wife, Lynne, joined him there to celebrate Thanksgiving. ''If Cheney continues to do as perfectly as he is doing now he could be discharged as early as tomorrow,'' Lisa Saisselin, a hospital spokeswoman, said today.
As Mr. Cheney recuperated, other Republicans continued today to pound Mr. Gore for his latest legal moves, accusing him of trying to use the courts to wrest victory from Mr. Bush. But Democrats countered that they were not the only ones filing legal challenges to election results.
Mr. Klain pointed out that the Republicans have filed at least two lawsuits seeking to order several Florida counties to count absentee ballots from members of the military, most of which were cast for Mr. Bush. ''They are in the nature of a contest proceeding,'' Mr. Klain said of the suits.
